---
title: Motion as the Most Effective Path to Truth
date: 2016-04-11 13:55:00 -04:00
layout: post
---

There are many good reasons that human beings tend to stay in one place. There are simple reasons, like familiarity, which leads to safety, which at its core is a biological drive, and social consistency - history and biology demonstrate that we are fundamentally social beings. Human civilization and society and the basis of ancient and modern economies are based on geographically static lifestyles. On a personal level, there have most certainly been environments in which I’ve thrived because of static living - most of my life has been spent this way.\
\
With this acknowledgement, however, it is invaluably important to also acknowledge the simple fact that human beings can survive, like many other animals, in a state of regular geographic motion. In both an ancient hunter-gatherer framework and a post-industrialist, globalized framework, it is possible to survive and wake up in a different location every day. Constant motion is the easiest way to fight the phenomenon of a habitual intellect or consciousness. It is also, perhaps, hard-wired into human evolution - it is a fact often overlooked that our species has been moving much longer than it has been static. \
\
I have found that a great deal of art that is widely admired is art that is somehow founded in human experience, and that art that is found beautiful by the greatest number of individuals is typically (yet not always) art that speaks to regular or ‘every-day’ experience - static experience. And yet artistic expression has always glorified, in a very significant sense, the thrill of motion. The most famous pieces of classical literature are epic poems - which certainly glorify motion - and it is very much a rational notion to suggest that motion is interesting - new things are to be expected. \
\
Modern philosophy informs us that the human consciousness - the phenomenon which created concepts like “goodness” and “truth” and “beauty” - is incapable of truly objective understanding. Consciousness, in it’s very nature, is fundamentally subjective: a subject is, simply put, a single, distinct, conscious individual. And yet language and society and even biology all point towards some sort of subjective agreement, and I would suggest that the closest we can get to some sort of objective understanding of reality is through this ‘subjective agreement.’\
\
Humans can only communicate with members of their own species. There is no other species on Earth that is capable of providing us with a way to relate to it’s own subjective experience, except perhaps through the expression of pain - but that is a conversation for another day. With this (albeit very anthrocentric) understanding, the search for quasi-objective truth - subjective agreement - is limited to human experience. And yet anyone can point to countless examples of subjective disagreement - even static lifestyles will expose an individual consciousness to a wide variety of unique understandings, a variety which yells ‘there is no truth’ loud and clear. But the intellect is hungry, and it yearns to believe that when it identifies a concept as ‘true’, that it can be correct in doing so. It would appear, then, that if (with our modern epistemological understanding) the closest we can get to the ‘objective’ is some sort of ‘subjective agreement,’ the objective is something that can only be genuinely pursued by the widest range of exposure to individual subjective experiences. On a very understandable level, this exposure is only remotely possible if an individual pursues motion.\
\
My suggestion, simply put, is that motion is the most effective path to truth.\
\
This suggestion is accompanied by the acknowledgement that no human being will ever get close to experiencing even a fraction of the variety of subjective experiences in the world. Even if one were to speak to every conscious being on the planet, the existence of numerous languages and even the various personal connotation of words in a single language point again to the impossibility of realizing a genuine ‘objective’ understanding. Despite this acknowledgement, every day we open our mouths, and every day our intellects thrive on exposure to new data, new subjective experiences whether they are our own or those communicated by others, and there is a significant, chemical reality to the feeling of mutual understanding. \
\
Since there is at least some sort of emotional validity to words, and since there is a rational connection between motion and the attainment of subjective-agreement objectivity (truth), I’d endeavor to suggest that the wisdom is held by those who have experienced motion. I am young, and certainly do not consider myself a wise individual - but I aspire to this distinction, and my aspirations point me, overwhelmingly, to travel - to motion.