---
title: The ‘Deep-Self View’ and its Misunderstanding of Genuine Responsibility
date: 2015-12-01 15:25:00 -05:00
---

One of the most universal human convictions is the understanding that we possess a will that we are free to direct towards any end we might choose. In spite of the strength of this conviction, however, the scientific understanding of natural laws and human psychology has presented legitimate reasons to believe we are mistaken. An intuitive understanding of free will appears to be at odds with determinism, while the denial of determinism has equally devastating implications for the same understanding. The debate continues, however, not simply because of our desire to be free but because of the fundamental role which free will plays in the validation of moral responsibility. In response to this dilemma, theories of compatibilism have been introduced which appear to present conceptions of free will that validate moral responsibility while remaining logically consistent with determinism. One such theory, conceived in part by Harry Frankfurt and substantially furthered by Susan Wolf, presents an attractive understanding of compatibilism which Wolf entitles the deep-self view. While I readily acknowledge I am unable to provide a conclusive understanding of the free will dilemma as a whole, I hope to assert the ways in which Frankfurt and Wolf’s conception of freedom is incompatible with and damaging to what I believe to be a correct understanding of responsibility.

A deterministic view of reality suggests that complete knowledge of natural laws and the history of the universe can be used to accurately predict every event that will occur, including those events which pertain to human decisions. This understanding is founded on the observation of certain events which always follow certain other events, or the phenomenon of causation. David Hume summarizes this phenomenon by asserting that “matter, in all its operations, is actuated by a necessary force, and every natural effect is so precisely determined by the energy of its cause that no other effect, in such particular circumstances, could possibly have resulted from it.” Acknowledging this observation, determinism asserts that every that every event is so precisely caused that the future of the universe is invariable and has been invariable since the first cause.

The problem which this understanding presents for moral responsibility is certainly not difficult to isolate. If the course of history is invariable, an individual who performs a particular immoral action during his lifetime was casually determined to act in this manner even before he was born – he could not have acted otherwise. An intuitive understanding of moral responsibility suggests that agents are responsible for an action only if that action was performed freely, but the necessitated actions which are implied by a deterministic understanding of reality readily appear to fall outside of the category of free action. Thus, it seems easy to assert that responsible agency is nonexistent under determinism. The principle acknowledged by this understanding, later referred to as The Principle of Alternate Possibilities, is that an individual is not morally responsible for an action unless he could have acted otherwise.

If we wish to maintain a belief in responsible agency, the first intuitive suggestion to make is that a deterministic understanding of the universe is inaccurate. However, it is just as easy to isolate the problem which indeterminism presents for responsible agency. If all events are random, it seems equally as impossible to suggest an agent’s action was done freely because random actions are equally outside of an agent’s control. Indeterminism accounts for the problem of an invariable future but does little to otherwise salvage moral responsibility.

Indeterminism’s failure to account for responsibility demonstrates why theories of compatibilism are attractive to philosophers that are committed to moral responsibility. Harry Frankfurt (1971) provides a compelling illustration of the concept of a will in order to approach a particular understanding of the will’s role in validating responsibility. He first asserts that the exhibition of desires, motives and decision-making is not seen exclusively among what we might call “persons,” but that persons alone possess what he calls “desires of the second order” (6). Frankfurt’s second-order desire is essentially “the desire to desire,” and it is this desire which constitutes the will. He allows that an individual may have second order desires which he may not actually want translated into action, so he introduces “second order volitions” to designate “effective” second order desires (10). As this pertains to any deliberate action, it is a second order volition “that is motivating \[an individual\] to do what he is actually doing” (8). Frankfurt asserts that the possession of second order volitions is a necessary property of personhood, and is also what makes a person “capable both of enjoying and of lacking freedom of the will” (14).

If the possession of a will can be summed up as the ability to have second order desires, Frankfurt’s conception of a free will can be simply defined as the freedom to “have the will one wants,” or to have the ability to choose which first order desires one transforms into second order volitions (15). What is important to acknowledge about this conception of freedom, however, is that it does not imply anything about an individual’s freedom of action. It is at this point that we have a clear understanding of the compatibilist’s argument. If determinism would have us believe we are unable to act otherwise, this inability to act otherwise should not, according to Frankfurt, have any bearing on the freedom of our will.

To illustrate this further, it is helpful to turn to another of Frankfurt’s papers (1969) which discusses the role which coercion plays in determining a person’s moral responsibility. He presents an example of a certain individual, Jones, who deliberates about performing an action and is later coerced by a significant threat to his well-being if he does not perform the action, such that by a reasonable standard of morality it appears he cannot be judged to have performed the action freely. Frankfurt argues that if Jones first firmly decides he will perform the action and is met by the threat after his decision has been made, even though coercion played some role in Jones action, he is still morally responsible, because “it is incorrect to regard a man as being coerced to do something unless he does it because of the coercive force exerted against him” (445). If one is concerned that this illustration does not aptly recreate the conditions suggested by determinism, Frankfurt includes another example involving a man who can accurately detect Jones intentions and threatens him only if he decides to not perform the action, such that while Jones cannot be said to have been able to do otherwise, he is unaware of the coercion that is upon him, and his motive for performing the action is completely his own. With this understanding, Frankfurt suggests a revision to the Principle of Alternate Possibilities, asserting that “a person is not morally responsible for what he has done if he did it only because he could not have done otherwise” (448, my emphasis).

Since what I hope has been a sufficient account of Frankfurt’s argument for compatibilism has been established, I can now assert why I believe his understanding of the freedom required for moral responsibility to be mistaken. Returning to Frankfurt’s account of second order desires, it is helpful to acknowledge that our desire to desire anything must be founded in an idea that one of our first order desires is somehow greater, considering the circumstances, than another. I believe this is an intuitive assumption, but Thomas Aquinas also acknowledges this in his Summa Theologica, where he asserts that a free will, despite its fundamentally voluntary nature, “tends of necessity to the good that is proposed to it” (q. 82, 2). For example, if a person is thirsty, they will have the first order desire to drink, but if the same person observes a fire which is about to cause damage to something they care about, they will also have the first order desire to extinguish the fire. If a glass of water is available, Frankfurt’s free agent or “person” can choose which of his first order desires to make effective through his capacity to form second order volitions, but the choice will be necessitated by his assessment of the goodness of the consequences of one action versus the other. Freedom of will is still possible, however, because a person’s conception of goodness will vary according to that person’s unique collection of values, which Aquinas suggests by asserting that “good is of many kinds, \[and\] for this reason the will is not of necessity determined to one” (q. 82, 2).

To further emphasize the effective role in which a person’s subjective values or unique understanding of goodness plays in determining that person’s will, it should be recognized that the majority of people who commit what are generally agreed upon as the greatest evils do so because they (albeit very incorrectly) believe what they are doing promotes goodness. Adolf Hitler believed that the extermination of millions of Jews would ultimately make Germany a better nation, and the assassinators of powerful men often believe they are bringing an end to someone whose power they feel is bad for the world. I would argue that even an individual who does something “without reason,” such as murdering without motive, does so with the intent of demonstrating the freedom of their will, which in itself can easily be conceived as a good act. However, we can acknowledge that moral responsibly, and ultimately free will itself, is founded in the understanding that the individuals in each of these examples have, in a world that is not fully predetermined, the opportunity to conform their values and thus their will to a rational standard of morality under which it is immoral to take the life of an innocent person.

If the will is necessitated towards good, it can certainly still be free, but it is clear that a problem arises if a person’s values – which necessarily direct his will towards the second order volition they define is better – are not up to him. If all of a person’s actions are determined before he is born, it seems intuitive that he is as unable to value otherwise as he is unable to act otherwise, and if this is acknowledged, Frankfurt’s revision of the Principle of Alternate Possibilities is accounted for. A person might perform a certain action only because it is his second order volition to do so, but because his will is necessitated by his values, and he is unable to value otherwise, it seems his sole motivation is just as invariable and external as a threat made against Frankfurt’s Jones before any deliberation.

This sentiment, however, is certainly not absent from compatibilist literature. Susan Wolf addresses this very concern in her paper entitled “Sanity and the Metaphysics of Responsibility.” Wolf begins by collecting the views of Frankfurt and other philosophers with similar understandings of the will under the name of “the deep-self view,” allows that their arguments have virtue, but acknowledges the following objection:

> “Even if my actions are governed by my desires and my desires are governed by my own deeper self, there remains the question: Who, or what, is responsible for this deeper self?” (460)

She dismisses the response that an individual’s deeper self is determined by a still deeper self as this clearly creates an endless recursion, but continues her argument, providing an example which she hopes will lead to an understanding of freedom that better matches our intuitive idea of moral responsibility, which she refers to as the “sane deep-self view.” Her example concerns an individual named JoJo, the son of a sadistic dictator, who grows up completely isolated within his father’s reign, with his father as a role model, and develops a highly distorted set of values. Wolf maintains that JoJo has a deep self, and “feels as integrated, free, and responsible as we do,” but cannot be truly considered a responsible agent because he is insane (462). Wolf defines sanity as “the minimally sufficient ability cognitively and normatively to recognize and appreciate the world for what it is,” and her exclusion of JoJo from moral responsibility indeed matches what seems to be the intuitive, accepted understanding of moral responsibility (463). She argues, however, that mature agents with sane deep selves can still be considered morally responsible, because while the values of such a person are equally as unavoidable as JoJo’s, they “unavoidably contain the ability to know right from wrong … \[and\] have the resources and reasons on which to base self-correction” (464).

My appeal to the problem of internal coercion based on pre-determined values is not unprecedented, but Wolf and several of the papers she cites each appeal to a similar form of the following argument: while persons, whether their futures are entirely determined or not, will never possess the ability to self-create because some sort of values are always imparted at a young age by external forces, persons in a fully deterministic reality still possess the ability to self-correct. Wolf adds the condition of sanity, but, while this certainly accounts for certain relevant cases, I believe the argument remains primarily the same: if a person is sane, even if he cannot act otherwise, he is morally responsible because his actions are governed by his deep self, and he has the ability to correct the values which dictate his deep self because he possess a functioning capacity for reason.

I find it easy to suggest, as I did earlier, that self-correction is just as much an action as anything else, and a person’s inability to act otherwise provides that self-correction is not actually within his control. I am aware, however, that Wolf’s argument assumes that if it is necessitated that we have the capacity for reason and the ability to appreciate the world for what it is, these conditions necessitate, or cause, that we should know right from wrong and act accordingly, and the failure of our own rational capacity to cause our own self-correction is our responsibility.

It is generally assumed there is a certain age or maturity at which a person’s familiarity with the world and his capacity for reason allow him to begin to choose his own values, but it is important to acknowledge that whatever selfishness, laziness or indifference might prevent him from self-correction, or even thinking about self-correction, are invariably part of his character because they are invariably a part of his future even before the moment of his birth. Whenever we begin to place blame on an individual for an immoral action, we must acknowledge that determinism requires that the values he possessed at the time of his deliberation and action must be exactly as they were if the course of history is invariable. Another way to understand the severity of this statement is to imagine an individual who wants to correct a particular action, by whatever reasoning, and wishes he could go back in time and give his earlier self this particular reasoning so that he might not perform the action. Even in discussions of time travel, it is accepted that the past is a fact and cannot, by any logical possibility, be changed. It is essential to understand determinism’s understanding of an individual’s future is no different. If we have any particular reason to self-correct, determinism requires that this particular reason was caused at the beginning of the universe. If we lack this particular reason, unless we are capable of producing that particular reason on our own, which the genuine agency which motivates moral responsibility in the first places suggests, but which I believe determinism necessarily denies, we necessarily lack the ability to self-correct. A final way to assert this is that determinism requires we cannot reason otherwise. If it is predetermined that an individual, even if he is sane and rational, fails to self-correct, I see no way of holding him genuinely responsible for his failure.

To summarize, by Frankfurt’s revised Principle of Alternate Possibilities, which Wolf’s argument relies on, an individual performs an action because he wants to, and yet the values which prompt him to do so are necessarily the way they are, and thus are out of his control. If an individual’s future is not invariable, the values given to him before he has the capacity to reason and appreciate the world for what it is can certainly change due to both external experiences and internal reasoning, at which point a discussion of his responsibility for an action is appropriate, but if is exactly determined that an individual values, wills, and then acts a certain way, I find it impossible for him to be held responsible.

I believe the detailed analysis provided by Frankfurt and furthered by Wolf does a commendable job of attempting to reconcile moral responsibility with a strictly determined reality, but I assert that genuine moral responsibility requires that an individual’s future cannot be predetermined. This does suggest that determinism and the freedom required by moral responsibility are incompatible. While I cannot provide an answer to the problems which accompany incompatibilism, I assert that accepting compatibilism requires us to accept a distorted understanding of moral responsibility. While I believe that our current inability to sufficiently explain how the observation of causation exactly motivates total determinism should grant that it will likely remain an unverifiable hypothesis, and an unverifiable hypothesis should not motivate us to depart from our intuitive assumption that we are free to will as we choose and be held responsible for our actions, I would rather deny moral responsibility than accept a distorted understanding of it.

**Works Cited**

Aquinas, Thomas. The Summa Theologica of St. Thomas Aquinas. London: Burns Oates & Washbourne, 1912. Print.

Frankfurt, Harry. “Alternative Possibilities and Moral Responsibility.” The Journal of Philosophy 66.1 (1969): 443-489. Web.

Frankfurt, Harry. “Freedom of the Will and the Concept of a Person.” The Journal of Philosophy 68.1 (1971): 5-20. Web.

Hume, David. An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding. Vol. XXXVII, Part 3. The Harvard Classics. New York: P.F. Collier & Son, 1909–14; Bartleby.com, 2001. 30 Nov. 2015.

Wolf, Susan. “Sanity and the Metaphysics of Responsibility.” Responsibility, Character, and the Emotions: New Essays in Moral Psychology. Ed. Ferdinand David Schoeman. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1988. 457-467. Web.